concrete is the second most used
substance on earth after water
and for this reason it has a significant
environmental impact
if it were a country it would rank third
for emissions
after china and usa but in fact concrete
is an intrinsically low impact material
with much lower emissions of co2 and
energy per tonne
than other materials like iron and steel
even things like bricks but because of
the enormous volumes we use
overall it contributes to about eight
percent
of man-made co2 emissions concrete is an
essential material
we need it to house people to build
roads
bridges and dams so we can't do without
it
but we can significantly reduce its
carbon footprint
concrete is held together by cement and
cement we use today called portland
cement
is made by heating together a
combination of limestone
and clay at a temperature of 1450
degrees
celsius but in fact most of the co2
emissions
come not from the heating but from the
breakdown of limestone
which is calcium carbonate into calcium
oxide
and carbon dioxide or co2
now we can't do without this component
altogether because nothing else is so
efficient at holding stuff together
but we can replace a large proportion of
it
with other materials with lighter carbon
footprint
many colleagues are looking for
solutions and here in switzerland
we have found that clays produce very
reactive materials
when they're calcined that's to say heat
it to around 800 degrees celsius
significantly lower than the 1450 needed
to produce cement
but more importantly there's no co2
emissions
from the decomposition of limestone
we then take this calcine clay and we
add a bit of limestone
but this time not heat it so no co2
emissions
and some cement and this combination
of limestone calcine clay and cement
we call lc3 now this lc3 here
has the same properties as portland
cement
it can be produced with the same
equipment and processes
and used in the same way but has up to
40 percent
lower co2 emissions and this was
demonstrated
in this house we built the aegean sea in
india
where we could save more than 15 tons of
co2
which was 30 to 40 percent compared to
existing materials
so why isn't everybody already using lc3
well cement is a local material the
reason portland cement is so pervasive
is that it's produced from the most
abundant materials on earth
and can be produced in india in the
united states
in ethiopia almost anywhere
and we have to work with people locally
to find the best combination of
materials to make lc3
we have already done full-scale trials
in
india and cuba in colombia a product
based on this technology was
commercialized a few months ago
and in the ivory coast the full-scale
plant
is being commissioned to calcine clays
and many of the world's largest cement
companies
are looking to introduce this in some of
their plants soon
so the possibility to replace portland
cement
with a different material but with the
same properties
produced in the same processes and used
in the same way
but with much lighter carbon footprint
is really
crucial to confront climate change
because it can be done
fast and it can be done on a very large
scale
with the possibility to eliminate more
than 400
million tons of co2 every year
so we can't do without concrete but we
can do without a significant amount of
the emissions it produces
thank you